---
layout: post
title: "Why do people hate vegans?"
permalink: /vegan
---  
  
There is a small social event in my memory (I am being vague about it because being specific would identify people I do not want to identify) at which I was asked, in the way one is always asked, why my plate was missing the meat. I gave the answer I usually give, which is that I would rather not eat other animals. The first response was approving. Someone said something about how good it was that I was looking after my health. I corrected this gently. It was not a health thing, I said; I think it is wrong to kill them when one does not have to. The temperature of the table changed. Within a few minutes I had been called, in escalating order, a hippie, a fanatic, and, when I tried to defuse the situation by reaching for a religious text that I thought might at least give us shared ground, a heretic (The hadith material on animal welfare is substantial; the question of whether industrial slaughter satisfies the conditions of *dhabīhah* is live among scholars who have looked at it carefully; the early Sufi tradition contains figures who renounced meat for reasons that look very recognisable from inside the modern argument. I am not going to litigate any of this here, partly because I am not qualified and partly because the textual case is not the point).

I have been thinking about that escalation for a while, and the thing I want to write about here is not the escalation itself, which is unremarkable, but a feature of it that took me some time to appreciate. The people at that table would, almost to a person, have agreed with most of what I would have said about industrial animal agriculture if they had been asked about it in any other setting. They would have agreed that factory farms are bad. They would have agreed that the conditions in which most of the meat they eat is produced are, when described in any detail, indefensible. Several of them had, in other conversations, mentioned trying to eat less meat. One had stopped eating red meat some years earlier on what she described as broadly ethical grounds. The hostility I encountered was not, in any straightforward sense, hostility from people who disagreed with my position. It was hostility from people who, on most of the relevant component claims, agreed with it.

The concession most people will make, in my experience, runs roughly like this: yes, factory farming is bad; yes, the conditions are indefensible; yes, I would prefer not to think about them in detail; no, I have not stopped eating meat, and I am not going to. This is a coherent position. It is not the position I hold, but I want to take it seriously as a position that a reflective person can occupy, because most reflective people I know in fact occupy it, and because failing to take it seriously is the most reliable way to misunderstand what is happening when these conversations go badly. The position is not *factory farming is fine*. The position is *factory farming is bad and I am going to keep participating in it*. 

I want to suggest that the reflexive hostility vegans encounter is not, primarily, the hostility of people who think they are right. It is the hostility of people who suspect they are wrong, who have decided not to act on the suspicion, and who experience the presence of someone who has acted on it as a kind of unwanted invoice. The clearest empirical evidence I know of for this is a pair of studies by Julia Minson and Benoît Monin, published in 2012, which I have been thinking about ever since I first read them. They asked meat-eaters to free-associate with the word *vegetarian*, and almost half produced negative terms. The negativity correlated with how morally superior the meat-eaters expected the vegetarians to feel, before any vegetarian had said anything. In the second study, they primed half the participants to think about being morally judged before they rated the vegetarians, and the primed group rated them lower. The hostility, in other words, was a defensive response to *anticipated* moral judgment, calibrated to how much judgment the meat-eater expected to receive. It had nothing to do with anything any vegetarian had actually said or done in the experimental setting. The vegetarian did not need to moralise in order to be experienced as moralising. The mere fact of the vegetarian, holding the position the vegetarian was known to hold, was sufficient to trigger the defensive response. The response was, on the part of the meat-eater, an entirely sincere reaction to a felt threat that no vegetarian was actually making.

I think this is roughly right and I think it explains a great deal. It explains why the dinner-party escalation has the shape it does. Health is a tolerable reason to abstain because health is about the speaker. Ethics is intolerable because ethics is, by implication, about everybody. *I do not eat meat for ethical reasons* is heard, accurately, as the first half of a sentence whose second half is *and you do*. The speaker does not need to complete the sentence; the listener completes it themselves and resents the speaker for the completion. The speaker, frequently, was not going to complete it. The speaker was going to ask for the bread. But the completion has already happened in the listener's head, and the resentment is therefore directed at a sentence the speaker did not say, in response to a judgment the speaker did not make, on behalf of a self the listener was already, before the conversation began, slightly unhappy with. The person who has never thought about animal suffering at all is rarely hostile. The person who has thought about it for ten minutes and decided to stop thinking about it is the one who will mock you at the table. The hostility scales with the proximity of the suppressed concession.

The fact that the hostility is defensive, and that it tracks a half-conceded moral discomfort, is not by itself an argument that the vegan is right about the underlying question. People defend many things they should not, in fact, give up. The structure of the defence does not adjudicate the substantive question. What it does is explain why the substantive question keeps not getting properly discussed: because the people who would be most able to discuss it usefully (the ones who already have the relevant intuitions in roughly the right place) are also the ones most heavily invested in not discussing it, because for them the discussion is most likely to end somewhere they would rather not be. The mainstream nonvegan position is not held by people who have thought about it carefully and decided meat-eating is fine. It is held, in most cases, by people who have decided not to think about it carefully, and whose defensive posture toward those who do is calibrated to keep the not-thinking sustainable. 

I have been vegan now for long enough that I no longer expect any particular dinner to go well. I have stopped reaching for the religious frame, because I have learned that it costs more than it is worth. I have learned to give the health answer when I am tired and the ethical answer when I am not. I do not think I am morally superior to the people I eat with; I think I am embarrassed in front of the animals, and I would rather be embarrassed in front of the people than in front of them. Whether that is the right way to feel I am genuinely not sure. But it is the actual reason, and I would rather say the actual reason than perform a reason I do not have.
